An exceptionally luminous and nearby gamma-ray burst GRB 221009A was observed on the 9th of October 2022 by INTEGRAL as well as numerous other space and ground telescopes, even those that were not designed to detect impulsive gamma-ray signals. It was estimated (GCN #32793) that such an even only occurs once in half a millenium, and the chance of it happening in INTEGRAL lifetime was only about 3%. 

Luminous GRBs sometimes reveal prolonged bright hard X-ray and gamma-ray afterglow, and it was previously seen by INTEGRAL to last up to few hours after the event (see GRB 120711A, Martin-Carillo+ 2012). INTEGRAL was well prepared to search for this emission in new bright events, and owing to fast follow-up strategy newly optimized for multi-messenger transient counterpart searches, the observation of GRB 221009A started only in a few hours after the ToO trigger, managing to catch early bright afterglow.

The intensity of the GRB was so high, that its afterglow was detected in INTEGRAL/JEM-X for almost a week, far exceeding the previous record of a few hours. Existence of detectable Hard X-ray afterglow strengthens the case for Gravitational Wave source follow-up with INTEGRAL. Days after the GRB, the emitting ejecta has substantially decellerated, and emits in much broader range of angles than the intense prompt flash. Gravitational wave sources are much more likely to be observed "side-ways", when the prompt flash is not apparent - as it was also the case in GW170817 (e.g. Savchenko+ 2017). In the future, hard X-ray follow-ups of rapidly expanding population of GW sources will very likely find this kind of emission, providing new source of precise localization.

The image shows GRB 221009A lightcurve recorded by several INTEGRAL instruments. On the left - prompt emission phase as seen by SPI-ACS, showing the brightest part of the GRB and an extended tail unil few hours, seen even in an non-imaging detector. On the right - three revolutions of ISGRI and JEM-X observations of the hard X-ray afterglow. In the last point, only JEM-X yields a significant detection. 

<!-- long BNS
short gev -->
